docs(clusters): remote cluster onboarding with oidc configuration (#973)
cloudoperators/greenhouse: docs/user-guides/cluster/oidc_connectivity.md

---
title: "Remote Cluster Connectivity with OIDC"
linkTitle: "Remote Cluster Connectivity with OIDC"
weight: 2
description: >

>   Onboard an existing Kubernetes cluster to Greenhouse with OIDC configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Onboard an existing Kubernetes cluster to Greenhouse, with OIDC configuration.
```

---

## Content Overview

- [OIDC Overview](#oidc-overview)
- [Preparation](#preparation)
- [Onboard](#onboard)
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)

> This guides describes how to onboard an existing Kubernetes cluster to your Greenhouse organization with OIDC

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide describes how to onboard an existing Kubernetes cluster to your Greenhouse organization with OIDC
```

> This guide describes how to onboard an existing Kubernetes cluster to your Greenhouse organization with OIDC

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This guide describes how to onboard an existing Kubernetes cluster to your Greenhouse Organization with OIDC
```

configuration.

> If you don't have an organization yet please reach out to the Greenhouse administrators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you don't have an organization yet, please reach out to the Greenhouse administrators.
```

> If you don't have an organization yet, please reach out to the Greenhouse administrators.

Author: done

> While all members of an organization can see existing clusters, their management requires [`org-admin` or

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While all members of an Organization can see existing Clusters, their management requires [`org-admin` or
```

`cluster-admin` privileges](./../../getting-started/core-concepts/organizations.md).

```
NOTE: The UI is currently in development. For now this guide describes the onboarding workflow via command line.
```

### OIDC Overview

> Starting from Kubernetes v1.21, the
> feature [Service Account Issuer Discovery](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-service-account/#service-account-issuer-discovery)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Starting from Kubernetes v1.21, the feature [Service Account Issuer Discovery](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-service-account/#service-account-issuer-discovery)
```

transforms the Kubernetes API server into an OIDC identity provider. This setup facilitates the issuance of tokens, via
service accounts to pods, which are recognizable by external services outside the Kubernetes cluster, thereby
establishing an authentication pathway between the pod within the cluster and external services including those on
Azure, AWS, etc.

> Staring from Kubernetes
> v1.30, [Structured Authentication Configuration](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2024/04/25/structured-authentication-moves-to-beta/)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Starting from Kubernetes v1.30, [Structured Authentication Configuration](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2024/04/25/structured-authentication-moves-to-beta/)
```

moved to beta and the feature gate is enabled by default. This feature allows configuring multiple OIDC issuers and

> passing them as file to the kube-apiserver.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
passing them as a configuration file to the Kubernetes API server.
```

```
NOTE: More information on Structured Authentication Configuration can be found at 
https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/authentication/#using-authentication-configuration
```

With the combination of _Service Account Issuer Discovery_ and _Structured Authentication Configuration_, Cluster to
Cluster trust can be established.

> The remote clusters can add the `Greenhouse` cluster's _Service Account Issuer_ as an
> OIDC issuer in their _Structured Authentication Configuration_ thus allowing `Greenhouse` cluster to authenticate
> against
> remote cluster, using its in-cluster service account token.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A remote cluster can add the `Greenhouse` cluster's _Service Account Issuer_ as an
OIDC issuer in its _Structured Authentication Configuration_. This allows the `Greenhouse` cluster to authenticate
against said remote cluster, using an in-cluster service account token.
```

The **OIDC Remote Cluster Connectivity** is illustrated below -

![OIDC Remote Connectivity](../oidc-remote-connectivity.png)

### Preparation

> The `greenhouse` cluster should expose the `/.well-known/openid-configuration` over an unauthenticated endpoint to allow

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `Greenhouse` cluster should expose the `/.well-known/openid-configuration` over an unauthenticated endpoint to allow
```

remote clusters to fetch the OIDC configuration.

```NOTE

> Some cloud providers or managed Kubernetes services might not expose this as an unauthenticated endpoint. In such

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some cloud providers or managed Kubernetes services might not expose the _Service Account Issuer Discovery_ as an unauthenticated endpoint. In such
```

cases, you can serve this configuration from a different endpoint and set this as the discoveryURL 
in structured authentication configuration.

> check out https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/authentication/#using-authentication-configuration
> for more information 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Check out https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/authentication/#using-authentication-configuration
for more information.
```

```

> Configure the OIDC issuer in the `Structured Authentication Configuration` of the remote cluster

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Configure the OIDC issuer in the `Structured Authentication Configuration` of the remote cluster.
```

**Example Structured Authentication Configuration file**

```yaml
apiVersion: apiserver.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: AuthenticationConfiguration
jwt:
  - issuer:
      url: https://<greenhouse-service-account-issuer>
      audiences:
        - greenhouse # audience should be greenhouse
    claimMappings:
      username:
        claim: 'sub' # claim to be used as username
        prefix: 'greenhouse:' # prefix to be added to the username to prevent impersonation (can be any string of your choice)
# additional trusted issuers
#     - issuer:
```

> Add RBAC rules to the remote cluster to allow the `Greenhouse` cluster to be authorized to CRUD kubernetes resources

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Add RBAC rules to the remote cluster, authorizing `Greenhouse` to manage Kubernetes resources.
```

```yaml
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: ClusterRoleBinding
metadata:
  name: greenhouse-<cluster-name>-oidc-access
subjects:
  - kind: User
    apiGroup: rbac.authorization.k8s.io
    name: greenhouse:system:serviceaccount:<your-organization-namespace>:<cluster-name>
roleRef:
  apiGroup: rbac.authorization.k8s.io
  kind: ClusterRole
  name: cluster-admin
```

> The subject kind `User` name must follow the pattern of
> `<prefix>:system:serviceaccount:<your-organization-namespace>:<cluster-name>`
> 
> `<prefix>` is the prefix used in the `Structured Authentication Configuration` file for the `username` claim mapping

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The subject kind `User` name must follow the pattern of
`<prefix>:system:serviceaccount:<your-organization-namespace>:<cluster-name>`.

`<prefix>` is the prefix used in the `Structured Authentication Configuration` file for the `username` claim mapping.
```

```NOTE

> For convenience purposes, the `prefix` is set to `greenhouse:` in the example `Structured Authentication Configuration`
> but it can be any string identifier of your choice
> 
> if you use '-' in prefix, for example, `identifier-` then the subject name should be `identifier-system:serviceaccount:<your-organization-namespace>:<cluster-name>`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For convenience purposes, the `prefix` is set to `greenhouse:` in the example `Structured Authentication Configuration`
but it can be any string identifier of your choice.

If you use '-' in prefix, for example, `identifier-` then the subject name should be `identifier-system:serviceaccount:<your-organization-namespace>:<cluster-name>`.
```

```

### Onboard

> You can now onboard the remote cluster to your Greenhouse organization by applying a secret in the following format:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can now onboard the remote Cluster to your Greenhouse Organization by applying a Secret in the following format:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  annotations:
    "oidc.greenhouse.sap/api-server-url": "https://<remote-cluster-api-server-url>"
  name: <cluster-name> # ensure the name provided here is the same as the <cluster-name> in the ClusterRoleBinding
  namespace: <organization-namespace>
data:
  ca.crt: <double-encoded-ca.crt> # remote cluster CA certificate base64 encoded
type: greenhouse.sap/oidc # secret type
```

Mandatory fields:

- the annotation `oidc.greenhouse.sap/api-server-url` must have a valid URL pointing to the remote cluster's API server
- the `ca.crt` field must contain the remote cluster's CA certificate

> - the secret type must be `greenhouse.sap/oidc`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- the type of the Secret must be `greenhouse.sap/oidc`
```

> - the secret name must be the same as the `<cluster-name>` used in the `ClusterRoleBinding`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- the name fo the Secret must equal the `<cluster-name>` used in the `ClusterRoleBinding`
```

Reviewer 2: It should be mentioned early on in the documentation, that the `<cluster-name>` will be used for the Greenhouse resource and that it is imutable

`ca.crt` is the `certificate-authority-data` from the kubeconfig file of the remote cluster.

> you can also extract it from the ConfigMap `kube-root-ca.crt` which is available in every namespace that is created.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `certificate-authority-data` can be extracted from the ConfigMap `kube-root-ca.crt`. This ConfigMap is present in every Namespace.
```

If the certificate is extracted from `kube-root-ca.crt` then it should be base64 encoded twice before adding it to the
secret.

example:

```shell
$ kubectl get configmap kube-root-ca.crt -n kube-system -o jsonpath='{.data.ca\.crt}' | base64 | base64
```

> If you are extracting the certificate from the kubeconfig file then the certificate is already base64 encoded, so the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the certificate is extracted from the KubeConfig file then the certificate is already base64 encoded, so the
```

encoding is needed only once.

> Apply the secret to the organization namespace to onboard the remote cluster

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Apply the Secret to the Organization Namespace to onboard the remote cluster.
```

```shell
$ kubectl apply -f <oidc-secret-file>.yaml
```

### Troubleshooting

> If the bootstrapping failed, you can find details about why it failed in the `Cluster.statusConditions`. More precisely

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the bootstrapping failed, you can find details about why it failed in the `Cluster.status.statusConditions`. More precisely
```

> there will be a condition of `type=KubeConfigValid` and `type=Ready` which might have hints in the `message` field.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
there will be a condition of `type=KubeConfigValid` and `type=Ready` which contain more information in the `message` field.
```

This is also displayed in the UI on the `Cluster` details view.

If there is any error message regarding RBAC then check the `ClusterRoleBinding` and ensure the subject name is correct

If there is any authentication error then you might see a message similar to
`the server has asked for the client to provide credentials`,
in such cases verify the `Structured Authentication Configuration` and ensure the `issuer` and `audiences` are correct.

> The `API Server` logs in the remote cluster will provide more information on the authentication errors

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `API Server` logs in the remote cluster will provide more information on the authentication errors.
```
